ON TEST 


S/O) 





For Mac 


This sleek 
four-channel 
interface and 
monitor controller 
embodies all the 
quality and style 
we've come to expect 
from Apogee. 


- 


PAUL WHITE 


pogee have both extremes of the 

Mac-compatible audio interface 

market covered, from their 
desktop Duet and its siblings at one end of 
the range, to their large-scale Symphony 
systems at the other. That being the case, 
it makes perfect sense for them to come 
out with something that sits comfortably 
between the two; something that’s still 
affordable to the quality-conscious home 
recording operator, but with enough I/O 
to handle ensemble recording and, if need 
be, surround mixing. That's exactly what the 


Apogee Quartet £1259 
PROS 


e High-quality converters and mic preamps. 

e Compact, elegant format. 

e Integrated monitor controller and 
headphone amp. 

e Maestro software allows the setting up of 
two different zero-latency monitor mixes. 


CONS 


e Adding an expander unit provides eight 
more inputs, but no more outputs. 


SUMMARY 
The Quartet is a logical addition to the 


Apogee interface range, and is well suited 
to the quality-conscious project studio 
owner who requires no more than 12 
simultaneous inputs. 


p di 


Quartet is, but that’s not all it is, as it has an 
integrated monitor controller too. 

As the name suggests, the Quartet is 
a four-channel interface, and while this 
may not look exactly generous to those 
who need to mic up a drum kit, a pair of 
ADAT (S/MUX) ports allow eight further 
channels to be added at sample rates of up 
to 96kHz, using one of the many expander 
units available, including Apogee’s own 
Ensemble. This takes the maximum input 
channel count to 12, which, being realistic, 
is enough for most small studio recording 
projects, even if they include a drum kit. 
If no expansion is required, the Quartet 
can run at sample rates up to 192kHz. 
The Quartet will work with any Core 


ANALOG IN 
3 


E a 
kidal. | Ls RAAI 





Apogee Quartet 


USB Audio Interface 







Audio compatible DAW running on an Intel 
Mac (1.5GHz CPU or above). 


Overview 


The wedge-shaped, die-cast aluminium 
hardware is sleek, surprisingly weighty, and 
a perfect complement to the Duet and One 
units, whose user interfaces share the same 
single-knob paradigm. Its ‘QuickTouch’ 
touch pads and displays are set into a single 
black panel, and the whole design exudes 
a stylish simplicity that is both elegant and 
practical. Even the non-slip base is incredibly 
effective — you really have to push hard to 
make this unit move once it's positioned on 
a smooth surface. 

The Quartet features two colour screens, 
similar in style to those used in the Duet, 
for metering and status display (levels, 


ANALOG OUT OPTICAL 
1 3 TA 


we GAT 
We OW DCERY OW 


The Quartet’s back panel features four ‘combi’ XLR/jack inputs, six analogue outputs on quarter-inch 
jack sockets, ADAT input ports, USB ports for both MIDI and connection to the host computer, word 


clock output, a ground terminal and cable clamp, and an input for the external power supply. 


156 November 2012 / www.soundonsound.com 


grouping, phase, muting, phantom power and Soft Limit). The 
leftmost QuickTouch pads are numbered one to four for input 
selection. Two more buttons select speaker or headphone 
level adjustment and there's simultaneous metering for all 
four inputs and the output levels. The single controller knob, 
with its integral push-switch, is used to adjust all the variable 
functions and is suitably large to use as a main volume control. 

Apogee make a big deal about the low latency that can 
be achieved with the Quartet: at 96kHz and at a buffer size 
of 32 samples, latency is just 3.6ms — a full millisecond less 
than the equivalent Firewire 400 setup. | used a buffer size of 
64 samples at 44.1kHz for most of my tests and still couldn't 
perceive any delay. Also of note is Soft Limit, Apogee’s 
proprietary circuitry for subtly squashing the peaks of loud 
signals to produce a more analogue-like saturation when the 
maximum signal level is approached. This can be enabled or 
disabled on an individual channel basis via the included (via 
download) Maestro 2 software. 

The Maestro 2 control software is an integral part of the 
package. It has a straightforward, single-window interface and 
is compatible with current Mac operating systems, as well as 
Snow Leopard. Here you can configure the system, select the 
input type, enable or disable Soft Limit on the inputs, and use 
Maestro’s mixer section for low-latency monitoring. Assigning 
speakers to touch pads and configuring the front-panel A, B 
and C buttons is also done here. 


Connectivity 


The Quartet has six balanced output jacks that can be used in 
pairs as three stereo speaker feeds, as a 5.1 feed, or as sends 
to external equipment. There's also a separate headphone 
output located on the right-hand side of the case, which has 
full level control via the front panel, and that can be fed from 
its own monitor mix if required. 

A-D/D-A conversion is courtesy of Apogee’s respected 
conversion technology, and the designers have paid a lot of 
attention to providing really good quality mic preamps to do 
their converters justice. These digitally controlled analogue 
preamps, each fitted with a ‘combi’ XLR/jack input socket, 
offer a very wide gain range of 0 to 75cB and have click-free 
transitions as the gain is adjusted. Phantom power at the full 
48 Volts is available for capacitor mics as you'd expect, and is 
independently switchable for each input. 

The USB port marked MIDI is configured only for Core 
MIDI devices, not for general USB functions, presumably to 
conserve bandwidth. While you could plug directly into your 
computer for MIDI over USB, this approach saves using up 
a port on your Mac. There’s a separate mini-USB socket for 
connection to the host computer using the included cable. 

Apogee have settled on the USB 2 protocol for connection 
to the host computer, as in its current incarnation it is actually 
faster than Firewire 400, and although USB 3 offers more 
bandwidth, the designers tell me this wouldn't result in any 
performance benefits. USB also seems likely to have a longer 
life-span than Firewire now that Thunderbolt is on the scene. 

Other rear-panel connections include an input for the 
included power supply and a word clock output on a standard 
BNC connector. A separate ground terminal (useful for 
laptop-based systems) also includes a cable clip for the power 
lead. The two ADAT ports allow S/MUX operation to double 
up the sample rate to a maximum of 96kHz and are inputs » 


www.soundonsound.com / November 2012 157 


ON TEST 
APOGEE QUARTET 


S/O) 


» only — you don't get any additional outputs 


with an expander connected. 

The Quartet always provides the master 
clock when an expander unit is connected, 
so the expander must be set to external 
sync and, as the ADAT connection only 
runs one way, a word clock cable must be 
connected between the two. As with other 
Apogee devices, the clock is designed 
to offer a high degree of stability, though 
how well an external device will lock to 
this depends very much on its own clock 
recovery circuitry. Still, there’s no point 
buying Apogee if you're planning to hook it 
up to something cheap and nasty! 


Operation 


When you plug in the Quartet, it is 
recognised by Core Audio and basic 
operation is possible, as the assignable 
touch pads are preconfigured to Dim, Mute 
and Clear Meters (the latter clearing the 
red ‘Overs’ indicators at the top of each 
meter indicating that a clip has occurred 
since they were last reset). You will, however, 
need to download the Maestro control 
software from the Apogee web site in order 
to make any changes or to switch on the 
phantom power. | mention this only because 
| received the physical unit for review shortly 
before getting a link to the software, so 
| had a while to play with it. 

When the QuickTouch pads are used 
for input, output or speaker-set selection, 
the currently selected parameter is the 
one adjusted via the controller knob. For 
example, if you select an input, the knob 
adjusts the preamp gain, whereas if you 
select a speaker, it adjusts the speaker 
volume. An LED ‘halo’ highlight ring appears 
around the currently active touch pad, so 
you always know what you’re adjusting. The 
three rightmost touch pads (labelled A, B 
and C and located above the rotary control) 
are all user assignable, so you can decide 
what you need them to do from a menu of 
options shown in the Maestro software: sum 
to mono, dim the levels, switch speaker sets 
or clear the ‘overs’ indicator in the meters. 
Up to three sets of stereo speakers can be 
connected, or all the outputs may be used 


Alternatives 


In this price and quality range, the main 
competition probably comes from RME, 
but it’s also worth looking at Focusrite, 

as they provide good-quality mics amps 

in their interfaces. If you can cope with 
fewer channels, I’d consider the Focusrite 
Forte, reviewed elsewhere in this issue. If 
single-knob operation is your thing, it’s also 
worth looking at the MOTU Track 16. 














Ow ees 


r | 


© 
ix 








on AxN ~N N us 
a) fe) fe-) a ' an -) f.) 
J w. J ‘eee d w 

- =. =. =. a P “ -= =. =. =. 

4 4 = 4 4 s 4 4 4 4 

J “2 + ‘a “a “3 r 2 "2 

a wt A “ > = a 
E " - - - - - - = * 
= d —t " "x = - <= “ +- 


t 





: r4 : r : ra : m g m £ m n i 3 0 bie ĉ ’ ce 
TTE ECI SI SI CTIS CNTT Er Er Erm Os ee ee es ee 
EN N EN om ~*~ N N i. l N N N 
1.) fee) (+e) s. fse.) f=.) =e (=e) . 


fe) 
w 





, — = S $ 
= =- =. — — = = — =. 
4 4 4 4 4 4 4 4 4! 
? a Z] (Z) "3 ” ” 3 „i 
Er af we ^ = > A a >| 
= ~ ~ - » - » » æl 
A os = - m - kad = 
a - i - ; n 3 - $ > Š m j - 


7 Lej -3 r. 


ik 





Sly et ee ee eee ee ee 


The Mixer page in Apogee’s Maestro 2 control software. 


to drive a single 5.1 system. You can also mix 
and match the functionality by, for instance, 
having two sets of speakers connected 

and then using the remaining two outputs 

to feed an outboard processor or provide 
further monitor mixes. 

When an input’'s gain is being adjusted, 
the meter area on the front panel changes 
to a gain-knob display, with further status 
indicators showing Grouping, Soft Limit and 
Polarity. Similarly, adjusting a speaker's level 
shows a rotary display for the level value and 
a speaker symbol, although a ‘Home Lock’ 
option prevents the view from changing. 
Once you stop turning the knob, the display 
automatically reverts to metering after a few 
seconds. These displays are pin sharp. 

With the Maestro software's Input panel 
open, you can also select the input type as 
Line +4dBu, Line -10dBv, Mic or Instrument. 
The appropriate symbol for each is shown 
above the input meters, and when a stereo 
recording is being made, channels can be 
grouped so that their gains are adjusted 
together. Polarity invert can also be 
activated, along with Soft Limit, which is, 
again, independent for each input. 

The Maestro Mixer window is where you 
can set up low-latency source monitoring 
if required, although, as mentioned, with 
a buffer setting of 64 | didn’t notice latency 
being a problem. The Mixer page actually 
shows two mixers, one above the other. This 
means, for example, that if you need two 
different monitor mixes while recording, 
one can be assigned to feed the speakers 
and one the headphones. Each mixer allows 
you to balance any of the live inputs with 
the sound coming back from your DAW, so 
as long as you remember to turn down the 
monitor level of any tracks you're currently 
recording in your DAW’s mixer, you can have 
latency-free monitoring. 

Separate tabs open pages for viewing 
Inputs, Outputs, Device Settings, Output 


158 November 2012 / www.soundonsound.com 


Routing, Mixer and System Setup. Device 
Settings is where you select what those 
three right-hand ABC buttons should 
control, and you can also set the push-switch 
in the rotary encoder to mute the speakers, 
the phones, or both. 

The Quartet comes with a quick-start 
guide, and a comprehensive user manual 
that details the setup procedure for all the 
mainstream DAWS is available from the 
Apogee web site, but if you've ever used an 
audio interface before, you should have no 
trouble finding your way around the Quartet. 


Performance 


My tests were made using Logic Pro. 
Selecting the interface is done in the usual 
Logic way, via audio preferences, which is 
also where you set the buffer size. You can 
name the inputs and outputs within Logic 
if you feel the need to. In other DAWs, you 
can uSually access such settings directly 
from within Apogee’s own control panel, 
but currently this doesn’t work for the 
Quartet within Logic. 

While, on paper, there are 
better-specified converters if you're willing 
to pay for them, it is probably fair to say 
that the quality of Apogee’s is so good 
that we're approaching the realm where 
any further improvements are just for the 
benefit of the test gear, rather than human 
ears. Their converters also have a reputation 
for sounding musical. With cheaper 
interfaces, working at 96kHz often yields 
a noticeable improvement in smoothness, 
as it places fewer demands on their digital 
filter sections, but in the case of the 
Quartet, even working at 44.1kHz produces 
creditably smooth and classy results. In fact, 
on a recorded speech test | was hard pushed 
to hear any significant sonic difference 
between working at 44.1kHz and 96kHz. 

The mic preamps are also worthy of 
mention, as they are exceptionally clean 


System Requirements 


e Intel Mac with 1.5GHz processor or faster, 2GB RAM 
minimum, 4GB recommended, OS 10.6.8 or higher. 

e The Quartet works with any Core Audio compatible 
application including Logic, GarageBand, MainStage, 
Final Cut, Pro Tools, Live, Digital Performer, Studio One, 
Cubase and Nuendo. 


and sound very focused, producing outstanding results even 
with dynamic microphones. Soft Limit is a nice touch, too, as 
it helps avoid unpleasant-sounding overloads while lending 
a slight analogue character to sounds as they approach the 
maximum level the converters can handle. With this switched 
on, it is very difficult to overcook the signal level. 

| found the touch interface so intuitive that | hardly noticed 
that there’s only one knob to adjust everything. Integration 
with the Maestro software is smooth and seamless, and using 
it to activate phantom power, polarity-invert switches and 
suchlike is actually less of a chore than bending down to find 
the physical switches on a conventional interface that might 
be stuck in a rack an arm’s reach away. 

| checked out the ADAT side of the unit using an external 
eight-channel RME unit, and this locked to the Quartet with 
no fuss. Its inputs showed up as numbers 5 to 12 in the system 
and | was in business. 


Impressions 


We live in a world where the top professional studios use 
pretty much the same computer/software systems as those 
of us further down the food chain. The main area in which 
pro studios are better specified than project studios is in 
terms of what's hooked up to the front and back ends of the 
computer, and the audio interface is a very big part of that. 
Yes, you can buy an audio interface with twice the I/O at half 
the price of the Quartet, but the converters and mic preamps 
will probably not sound nearly as good. On many of them, 
you can hear digital crosstalk and interference from the USB 
connection grumbling away in the background if you need to 
run the mic amps at a high gain setting, as you might when 
using a ribbon mic. | tested for this on the Quartet. Recording 
ambient room noise with a passive ribbon mic at very high 
gain settings, and then normalising the result, showed up only 
room sound and a little honest electronic hiss. There have 
been occasions when trying this test with lesser interfaces 
has produced a result reminiscent of a fax machine being fed 
through a coffee grinder. 

When judging the value of something like the Quartet, 
you have to factor in what it might cost you to add decent 
mic preamps to a more mundane interface, and also the cost 
of a separate monitor controller. You also have to consider 
logistics: where is everything going to fit? The Quartet 
provides a compact solution capable of true ‘big boys’ 
performance, and the minuscule quality difference between 


it and those truly 
£ £1258.80 including VAT. esoteric devices 
T Sonic Distribution 


costing 10 times 
+44 (0)845 500 2 500. 


as much really is in 


E apogee@sonic-distribution.com : 

W > www.sonic-distribution.com the realm of ‘But 

W www.apogeedigital.com will it affect record 
sales?’ SHH 


www.soundonsound.com / November 2012 


ihe) 


WAT OVAVALG 


“Besides the excellent interviews and fascinating, 
in-depth recording and mixing articles, | can 
always depend on Sound On Sound for 
complete, unbiased reviews of the latest 


olsson 


"As a professional | admire Sound On Sound 
as one of the most trusted and credible 
sources of inspiration and information.” 


pro-audio gear. ” Jack Joseph Puig, mixer, producer, Grammy 


Award winner (Rolling Stones, U2, Mary J 


Bob Clearmountain, engineer, producer and Blige, Black Eyed Peas) 


mixer, Grammy Award winner (Bruce Springsteen, 
The Rolling Stones, Paul McCartney, INXS) 





SOUND ON A OUND 


The World's Best Recording Technology MEIEMAA 





WUS PROD 










RAE r E E a 
! v F ; y ee fy On Fa ; j 
MHT ECHMPWES j 4 CORAP TER ALY a Ws f d f we f 


SOUND ON. 
E 


DEO IRDEFE NENT IL DEFTH paces 


SouND 


The Worlds Rest Recording Technalagy Magazine 


=> novation i 


S MININOVA 


THE MINI SYNTH THAT PACKS SERIOUS =a 
PERFORMANCE POWER =f 


“fp i Sound magazine, 


201 2 edition 


Available on the 
J App Store 





SOUND ON SOUND 


Tv Nota) Meat Reverdang Technology Maga 


novation 


BLS le 


THE MINI SYNTH THAT PACKS SERIOUS 
ANCE POWER 


November 2012 















The per dept "4 
pE QUA CAKE 
nok TOP TER por’ 
nerd THESIZER 
(TEE fORTE 
see boo 


: ' a 
APOGEE QUARTET \ Ñ l RDS 
DESKTOP INTERFACE N 


$ TR 
S pbcRETE À p 
PT. = 
=a CO us FOCUSRITE FORTE 
= 5 oe Sook lee USB INTERFACE pet ire es 
=" Lye ft rs T ust l 


VERTIGO VSC2 DISCRETE ° 
VCA COMPRESSOR 


A CAREER ON THE BOARDS = 


BTATO MIEN AS A LIVE SOUND ENGSEER 


7 ~ CLASSIC TRACKS: OASIS; WONDERWALL = 


pi 
E 
a 
= E 
E 
E 
= 


ete a yo 
rece 


N 


" 
l 
ki 





VDO ONE LOG DOL PLEFOMMER PRO TOOLS MEASON SONAR CUBASE / UVE 





Subscribe and Save Money! 


Visit our subscriptions page at www.soundonsound.com/subscribe 
for more information on the Sound On Sound App go to: www.soundonsound.com/app 


Sound On Sound, Media House, Trafalgar Way, Bar Hill, Cambridge, CB23 8SO, United Kingdom 
Email: subscribe@soundonsound.com Tel: +44 (0) 1954 789888 Fax: +44 (0) 1954 789895 


All contents copyright © SOS Publications Group and/or its licensors, 1985-2012. All rights reserved. 
The contents of this article are subject to worldwide copyright protection and reproduction in whole or part, whether mechanical or electronic, is expressly forbidden 


without the prior written consent of the Publishers. Great care has been taken to ensure accuracy in the preparation of this article but neither Sound On Sound Limited 
nor the publishers can be held responsible for its contents. The views expressed are those of the contributors and not necessarily those of the publishers 


